timescope (#2961)
huggingface/blog: timescope.md

---

> title: "TimeScope: How Long Can Your Video-LMM go?"

Reviewer: it would be nice to keep the filename long for SEO

thumbnail: /blog/assets/timescope/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: orrzohar
  guest: true
  org: Stanford
- user: ruili0
  guest: true
  org: Stanford
- user: andito
  guest: false

>   org: HuggingFace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  org: huggingface
```

- user: nicholswang
  guest: true
  org: Stanford
---

# TimeScope: How Long Can Your Video-LMM go?

> 

Reviewer: might be nice to add a TLDR; and a table-of-contents at the beginning

> As multimodal AI continues to advance, recent models have begun to make ambitious claims regarding their capacity for “hour-long video understanding.” Drawing inspiration from progress in long-context language models—where extended reasoning over lengthy textual inputs has become increasingly feasible—vision-language systems now advertise context windows encompassing thousands of frames. However, these developments prompt a critical inquiry: to what extent do such models demonstrate genuine temporal comprehension, as opposed to surface-level pattern recognition or overstated capabilities?

Reviewer: the sentences are a bit too long and sophisticated, would be great to simplify them. people will quit reading otherwise

> Text benchmarks such as **HELM** and **RULER** have exposed the fragility of long-context claims, showing that models often falter when tasks demand more than simple retrieval, like reasoning or aggregation at long context lengths. In the video domain, however, we're still playing catch-up. The most common test, **Video Needle in a Haystack (VideoNIAH)**, injects static *images* as "needles" into videos, effectively measuring visual search rather than true temporal dynamics. As a result, even top-tier models advertising massive frame capacities are rarely trained beyond ~256 frames and see sharp drops on benchmarks like **Video-MME** when pushed further.

Reviewer: might be nice to link them to HF datasets

> This measurement gap leaves us wondering: What does it really mean for a model to "understand" long videos? To address this, we're excited to introduce **TimeScope**, a new open-source benchmark hosted on Hugging Face. TimeScope probes the limits of long-video capabilities by inserting short (~5-10 second) *video clips*—our "needles"—into base videos ranging from 1 minute to 8 hours. With three distinct task types, it evaluates not just retrieval but synthesis, localization, and fine-grained motion analysis, providing a more holistic view of temporal comprehension.

Reviewer: very nice!

  <img src="https://huggingface.co/spaces/Apollo-LMMs/TimeScope/resolve/main/overview.png" alt="Benchmark Design Diagram" style="width: 90%; height: auto;">

*Figure 1: Overview of TimeScope's needle insertion process. A long base video (1 min to 8 hours) serves as the haystack, into which we splice short video needles (~10-20 seconds). Tasks require detecting, synthesizing, or analyzing content from these needles, embedded at varying depths.*

We evaluate across three needle types, each targeting a different aspect of long-video comprehension:

### 1. General QA
This tests basic retrieval and understanding of a localized event. Questions are crafted such that sampling a single relevant frame from the needle should suffice—mimicking queries about a brief segment in a longer video.

Example:  
What mode of transportation is shown in the video?  

<video controls>
  <source src="https://huggingface.co/spaces/Apollo-LMMs/TimeScope/resolve/main/train.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

### 2. Information Synthesis (OCR QA)

> Here, we embed multiple text-based needles (e.g., 2-4 short clips displaying "secret words" via on-screen text) at different points in the video. The model must identify all words and report them in chronological order, simulating tasks like extracting timestamps or key facts from dispersed scenes. This requires scanning the full timeline and understanding relative positioning.

Reviewer: might be nice to add example again

### 3. Fine-Grained Temporal Understanding
For questions focusing on motion or sequences within a short clip, single-frame sampling won't cut it—the model needs to perceive dynamics across frames. This probes whether long-context handling preserves temporal fidelity.

Example:  
How many times did the man swing his axe? (a) one (b) two (c) three (d) four (e) five (f) six  

<video controls>
  <source src="https://huggingface.co/spaces/Apollo-LMMs/TimeScope/resolve/main/temporal_wood_cutting.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

By varying video lengths and needle placements, TimeScope quantifies the maximum duration a model can "reasonably" claim to understand, highlighting drop-offs in performance as contexts grow.

## Baseline Evaluation Results

> To kick things off, we ran TimeScope on a suite of leading vision-language models, from open-source favorites to the juggernaut: Gemini2.5-pro. The results underscore the benchmark’s value: even models with advertised long-context prowess struggle with authentic temporal tasks at scale. These findings reveal clear patterns—performance cliffs around certain durations, strengths in static retrieval versus weaknesses in motion analysis—and pave the way for targeted improvements in model training. For detailed results and visualizations, check out our Hugging Face Space embedded above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To kick things off, we ran TimeScope on a suite of leading vision-language models, from open-source favorites to the juggernauts like Gemini2.5-Pro. The results underscore the benchmark’s value: even models with advertised long-context prowess struggle with authentic temporal tasks at scale. These findings reveal clear patterns—performance cliffs around certain durations, strengths in static retrieval versus weaknesses in motion analysis—and pave the way for targeted improvements in model training. For detailed results and visualizations, check out our Hugging Face Space embedded above.
```

## Open-Sourcing

We are open-sourcing all components of TimeScope:

- **Dataset**: [Apollo-LMMs/TimeScope](https://huggingface.co/datasets/Apollo-LMMs/TimeScope)
- **Leaderboard**: [Apollo-LMMs/TimeScope](https://huggingface.co/spaces/Apollo-LMMs/TimeScope)

> - **Evaluation Framework**: [lmms-eval](https://github.com/EvolvingLMMs-Lab/lmms-eval)

Reviewer: would be nice to end with a call for action below
